Data Enrichment
Sourcing
Guidelines
The choices made by AI practitioners have an
important influence on the working conditions
of data enrichment professionals who perform
tasks such as data annotation, data cleaning,
and human review of algorithmic outputs.
This document lists five key, worker-centric
guidelines that AI practitioners should follow
when setting up a project involving data
enrichment. They are based on the input
from a multi-stakeholder community of data
enrichment companies, labor organizers,
AI practitioners, and leading researchers in
the space.
To learn more about how this resource
was developed, visit PAI’s responsible data
enrichment sourcing library.
Ensure all data enrichment
1 2
workers are paid above the
local living wage
AI Practitioners must pay workers/participants at
least the living wage for their location. Therefore,
please take into consideration the following when
setting payment terms: the worker’s location,
estimated time needed to complete a task and other
associated activities, payment structure (e.g. per
task, per hour, etc), and the difficulty of the task.
For more information on Global Living Wage,
please see Annex 1 of PAI’s white paper. These are
calculated at a country-level basis; if more exact
locations are provided (e.g. State/City), please use the
corresponding living wage for that location, as these
may differ to the national standard.
If the data enrichment project pays per task, use
the pilots (see Guideline 2) to establish a baseline
estimate of how long it takes to complete a task,
including time spent reading instructions, going
through any training and reviewing work before
submission. The per task rate should be based
on the hourly living wage, divided by the adjusted
number of tasks that can be completed in an hour.
Furthermore, researchers should track completion
times throughout the data enrichment project and
adjust targets, and compensation, accordingly.
AI Practitioners should pay for any work completed
by workers to compensate for their time, being
mindful that mass rejections of work completed
without opportunities for redress impact the
workers’ livelihood. The only exceptions should be
in the cases of obvious abuse or fraud.
Design and run a pilot
before launching a data
enrichment project
AI Practitioners should always run a pilot before
launching a new or substantially modified data
enrichment project; this helps establish reasonable
baselines for timeframes and payments. Pilots are
smaller versions of data enrichment projects done
before the main project with the goal of testing
the project design so AI practitioners can make
adjustments before the full data enrichment project
is done under the same conditions. Pilots should also
be used to test the clarity of the instructions and
gather feedback on worker experience, looking at task
design and tool usability. Testing should occur with
a representative group of workers/participants to
ensure that researchers get feedback from the types
of people who will be completing the task later.
Note: Pilots can recruit a distinct set of workers compared
with the main data enrichment project. However, using
the same filters as you would for the actual task is helpful
for recruiting similar workers for both.3
Identify appropriate data
enrichment workers for the
desired task
Matching data enrichment tasks to the skill set,
expertise, and/or demographic category of workers
can ensure your data enrichment project keeps
to time, whilst also protecting workers against
the economic impacts of wasted time or rejected
tasks. Depending on the data enrichment project, AI
practitioners may need to identify a demographically
representative set of workers or identify workers with
the relevant demographic background necessary
to complete the task (e.g. cultural background, age
range, location). AI Practitioners should be mindful
when designing eligibility criteria, assuring the
requirements for successful task completion are
clear and only relevant to the task (e.g. language
proficiency or domain knowledge) and not onerous,
overly limiting or potentially identifying.
For more complex tasks, or those that require
a certain level of domain knowledge, it may be
beneficial to maintain a consistent workforce
across the project lifetime; in this case, both data
quality and worker satisfaction can be improved
by investing in a workforce. In other instances
a consistent workforce may not be appropriate;
for example if data collection would benefit from
diversity or broader coverage of individuals.
Provide verified instructions
4 5
and/or training materials
for data enrichment workers
Create clear training materials for data enrichment
tasks, taking into account the existing and required
domain knowledge of workers, as well as the tools
or platforms being used. Instructions should
undergo review by a representative group of workers
during an official pilot, before becoming verified.
Instructions should typically include examples of
correctly and incorrectly completed tasks and, for
more difficult studies, allow workers a few practice
tasks before launching a new data enrichment
project. Please refer to this checklist to help guide
you in what to include as a part of your instructions
and training materials.
Note: As discussed in 1, time spent reading instructions
or in training should be compensated.
Establish clear and
regular communication
mechanisms
Clear communication is critical to ensuring workers
have the necessary information to effectively and
efficiently complete tasks. AI Practitioners should
clarify expectations around communication
cadence with workers or managers before starting
the project and ensure that workers know who and
how to raise questions or concerns with, including
contesting any rejected work.
Irrespective of whether your data enrichment
project involves one off interactions with workers
or reengagement with the same pool over time, AI
Practitioners must ensure that workers are provided
with clear mechanisms for asking questions,
reporting concerns or technical issues that may
arise during the data enrichment project. Moreover,
AI Practitioners should collect feedback from
workers on all aspects of the project and adjust the
data enrichment project accordingly.