On the first anniversary of their landmark global agreement, UNI Global Union and Teleperformance are marking a year of accelerated progress in strengthening workers’ rights and improving the health and safety of employees, particularly content moderators, across the company’s global operations.
The three-year pact, which was sealed on 1 December 2022, is the first of its kind in the business services sector and covers nearly 500,000 Teleperformance employees in 95 countries. It is based on the recognition of core labour rights as established by the International Labour Organization and respect for the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.
UNI and Teleperformance have started implementation of the global agreement in Colombia, El Salvador, Jamaica, Poland and Romania, representing over 50,000 workers.
The implementation agreements signed in these countries flesh out the terms of the global pact, and in real terms, they confirm and secure workers the right to organize in freedom and autonomy, while allowing unions access to Teleperformance workers both on-site and remotely.
More countries, outside the initial five, are now in the process of negotiating their own implementation agreements.
UNI and Teleperformance have used the global agreement’s provisions to form an international working party on health and safety, which brings together management, workers, experts and UNI trade union affiliates to look at health and safety risks.
Christy Hoffman, General Secretary of UNI Global Union, said:
“Teleperformance is leading the way in its industry for respecting human rights due diligence. Together with the company and unions on the ground, we are making our global agreement a reality by improving safety for workers, especially content moderators. We look forward to deepening our relationships with management at all levels of the corporation to further training and recognition for freedom of association and collective bargaining.”
Olivier Rigaudy, Deputy CEO of Teleperformance, said:
“Teleperformance is deeply committed to Corporate Social Responsibility and has been a signatory of the UN Global Compact since 2011. In line with our values and CSR practices, this agreement confirms our willingness to strengthen our commitments regarding social dialogue. A constructive social dialogue has a key role to play in our business development. Together with UNI, we can make Teleperformance an even better place to work.”