Today, on 1 August 2025, in Izmir, Türkiye, an international delegation – comprised of trade union representatives from Türkiye, Canada and multiple other countries, united under UNI Global Union – calls for an urgent, global dialogue with TELUS, the major Canadian multinational telecommunications and business services company. This united front marks the first step in our collective push for a global agreement that guarantees fundamental labour rights for all TELUS workers, no matter where they are.
TELUS’s growth has been powered by thousands of workers in customer service, technicians and outsourced operations worldwide. This growth must be matched by a strong commitment to labour rights, social justice and the dignity of the people who make its business possible.
Therefore, the undersigned trade unions call on TELUS to:
Fully recognize the right to organize and to bargain collectively in every country where the company operates, without interference, in accordance with the core conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO). Telus will abide by collective agreements in good faith. Telus will not engage in anti-union behaviour.
Establish effective and transparent procedures for resolving labour conflicts, through genuine dialogue and in good faith, avoiding any form of retaliation or repression against union activity.
Guarantee common minimum labour standards, including protection of physical and mental health, psychologically reasonable work metrics, decent wages, fair working conditions, job security and employment stability.
Protect union members from any form of discrimination or retaliation, ensuring they are free to organize, represent and negotiate on behalf of their co-workers.
We also raise our serious concerns about the situation in Türkiye, where TELUS has so far refused to recognize the trade union chosen by the workers. Union members and leaders report facing harassment and unfair dismissals simply for exercising their right to join a union. Such practices are unacceptable and contradict international labour standards.
In Canada, TELUS has been downsizing and outsourcing its Canadian operations with scant regard for the impact on workers or working conditions.
But we believe these issues can be remedied through constructive engagement. Through dialogue, we can develop binding commitments and ensure the same rights and protections for workers across the company’s operations.